Add an Amazon DynamoDB guide (#3706)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/dynamodb-guide.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

= Quarkus - Amazon DynamoDB Client

include::./attributes.adoc[]

DynamoDB is a scalable AWS managed *NoSQL* database.
It supports both key-value and document data models, that enables to have a flexible schema for your data.

> This extension provides functionality that allows the client to communicate with the service when runninng in Quarkus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension provides functionality that allows the client to communicate with the service when running in Quarkus.
```
This sentence looks too generic to me. It doesn't bring much.

> More information about DynamoDB you can find at https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/[Amazon DynamoDB].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more information about DynamoDB at https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/[the Amazon DynamoDB website].
```

NOTE: The DynamoDB extension is based on https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/v2/developer-guide/welcome.html[AWS Java SDK 2.x].

> It's major rewrite of the 1.x code base that offers two programming models (Blocking & Async).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a major rewrite of the 1.x code base that offers two programming models (Blocking & Async).
```

> Keep in mind it's actively developed and does not support yet all the features available in SDK 1.x such as https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-java-v2/issues/36[Document APIs], https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-java-v2/issues/35[Object Mappers]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind it's actively developed and does not support yet all the features available in SDK 1.x such as https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-java-v2/issues/36[Document APIs] or https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-java-v2/issues/35[Object Mappers]
```

The Quarkus extension supports two programming models:

> * Blocking access using Apache Http Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Blocking access using the Apache HTTP Client
```

> * https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/v2/developer-guide/basics-async.html[Asynchronous programming] based on JDK's `CompletableFuture` objects and Netty Http client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/v2/developer-guide/basics-async.html[Asynchronous programming] based on JDK's `CompletableFuture` objects and the Netty HTTP client.
```

> In this guide, we see how you can get your REST services to use the DynamoDB locally and on AWS account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we see how you can get your REST services to use the DynamoDB locally and on AWS.
```

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* JDK 1.8+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* an IDE
* Apache Maven 3.5.3+

> * AWS Account to access DynamoDB service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An AWS Account to access the DynamoDB service
```

> * Optionally, Docker for your system to run dynamoDB locally for testing purposes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optionally, Docker for your system to run DynamoDB locally for testing purposes
```

=== Setup DynamoDB locally

> The easiest way to start work with DynamoDB is to run local instance as container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to start working with DynamoDB is to run a local instance as a container.
```

[source,shell,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
docker run --publish 8000:8000 amazon/dynamodb-local:1.11.477 -jar DynamoDBLocal.jar -inMemory -sharedDb
----

> This starts a DynamoDB instance, that's accessible on port `8000`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This starts a DynamoDB instance that is accessible on port `8000`.
```

> You can check it running accessing the web shell on `http://localhost:8000/shell`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check it's running by accessing the web shell on `http://localhost:8000/shell`.
```

> Have a look at the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/DynamoDBLocal.html[Setting Up DynamoDB Local] for other options to run DynamoDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have a look at the https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/DynamoDBLocal.html[Setting Up DynamoDB Local guide] for other options to run DynamoDB.
```

Open `http://localhost:8000/shell` in your browser.

> Copy & paste a following code to the shell and run it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following code to the shell and run it:
```

[source,js,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
var params = {
    TableName: 'QuarkusFruits',
    KeySchema: [{ AttributeName: 'fruitName', KeyType: 'HASH' }],
    AttributeDefinitions: [{  AttributeName: 'fruitName', AttributeType: 'S', }],
    ProvisionedThroughput: { ReadCapacityUnits: 1, WriteCapacityUnits: 1, }
};

dynamodb.createTable(params, function(err, data) {
    if (err) ppJson(err);
    else ppJson(data);

});
----

> === Setup Dynamodb on AWS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Set up Dynamodb on AWS
```

Before you can use the AWS SDKs with DynamoDB, you must get an AWS access key ID and secret access key.

> For more information, see [Setting Up DynamoDB (Web Service)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/developerguide/SettingUp.DynamoWebService.html).

Reviewer: This looks a lot like a Markdown link? Is it valid in Asciidoc?

Reviewer: I had a quick look at the Asciidoc reference and it doesn't look supported. I let you fix it.

Author: yep, fixed.

> We recommend to use AWS CLI to provision table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend to use the AWS CLI to provision the table:
```

[source,shell,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
aws dynamodb create-table --table-name QuarkusFruits \
                          --attribute-definitions AttributeName=fruitName,AttributeType=S \
                          --key-schema AttributeName=fruitName,KeyType=HASH \
                          --provisioned-throughput ReadCapacityUnits=1,WriteCapacityUnits=1
----

== Solution

> The application built is similar as in other guides and allows to manage elements (fruits) and they are stored in DynamoDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application built here allows to manage elements (fruits) stored in Amazon DynamoDB.
```
The user might not have read the other guides because he might just be interested in DynamoDB.

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `dynamodb-client` directory.

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,shell,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=dynamodb-client \
    -DclassName="org.acme.dynamodb.FruitResource" \
    -Dpath="/fruits" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-jsonb,dynamodb"
----

This command generates a Maven structure importing the RESTEasy/JAX-RS and DynamoDB Client extensions.
After this, the `amazon-dynamodb` extension has been added to your `pom.xml`.

== Creating JSON REST service

> In this example, we will create an application to manage a list of fruits. The example application will demonstrate two programming models supported by the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we will create an application to manage a list of fruits. The example application will demonstrate the two programming models supported by the extension.
```

    public static Fruit from(Map<String, AttributeValue> item) {
        Fruit fruit = new Fruit();
        if (item != null && !item.isEmpty()) {
            fruit.setName(item.get(AbstractService.FRUIT_NAME_COL).s());
            fruit.setDescription(item.get(AbstractService.FRUIT_DESC_COL).s());
        }
        return fruit;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getDescription() {
        return description;
    }

    public void setDescription(String description) {
        this.description = description;
    }

    @Override
    public boolean equals(Object obj) {
        if (!(obj instanceof Fruit)) {
            return false;
        }

        Fruit other = (Fruit) obj;

        return Objects.equals(other.name, this.name);
    }

    @Override
    public int hashCode() {
        return Objects.hash(this.name);
    }
}
----

Nothing fancy. One important thing to note is that having a default constructor is required by the JSON serialization layer. The static `from` method creates a bean based on the `Map`
object provided by the DynamoDB client response.

> Now create a `org.acme.dynamodb.AbstractService` that will consist of helper methods that prepares DynamoDB request objects for reading, adding items to the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now create a `org.acme.dynamodb.AbstractService` that will consist of helper methods that prepare DynamoDB request objects for reading and adding items to the table.
```

    public final static String FRUIT_DESC_COL = "fruitDescription";

    public String getTableName() {
        return "QuarkusFruits";
    }

    protected ScanRequest scanRequest() {
        return ScanRequest.builder().tableName(getTableName())
                .attributesToGet(FRUIT_NAME_COL, FRUIT_DESC_COL).build();
    }

    protected PutItemRequest putRequest(Fruit fruit) {
        Map<String, AttributeValue> item = new HashMap<>();
        item.put(FRUIT_NAME_COL, AttributeValue.builder().s(fruit.getName()).build());
        item.put(FRUIT_DESC_COL, AttributeValue.builder().s(fruit.getDescription()).build());

        return PutItemRequest.builder()
                .tableName(getTableName())
                .item(item)
                .build();
    }

    protected GetItemRequest getRequest(String name) {
        Map<String, AttributeValue> key = new HashMap<>();
        key.put(FRUIT_NAME_COL, AttributeValue.builder().s(name).build());

        return GetItemRequest.builder()
                .tableName(getTableName())
                .key(key)
                .attributesToGet(FRUIT_NAME_COL, FRUIT_DESC_COL)
                .build();
    }
}
----

> Then, create a `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitSyncService` that will be the business layer of our application and store/load the fruits from the DynamoDB using synchronous client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, create a `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitSyncService` that will be the business layer of our application and stores/loads the fruits from DynamoDB using the synchronous client.
```

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.dynamodb;

import java.util.List;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import javax.inject.Inject;

import software.amazon.awssdk.services.dynamodb.DynamoDbClient;

@ApplicationScoped
public class FruitSyncService extends AbstractService {

    @Inject
    DynamoDbClient dynamoDB;

    public List<Fruit> findAll() {
        return dynamoDB.scanPaginator(scanRequest()).items().stream()
                .map(Fruit::from)
                .collect(Collectors.toList());
    }

    public List<Fruit> add(Fruit fruit) {
        dynamoDB.putItem(putRequest(fruit));
        return findAll();
    }

    public Fruit get(String name) {
        return Fruit.from(dynamoDB.getItem(getRequest(name)).item());
    }
}
----

> Now, edit `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitResource` class as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, edit the `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitResource` class as follows:
```

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.dynamodb;

import java.util.List;

import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.Consumes;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.POST;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/fruits")
@Produces(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
@Consumes(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
public class FruitResource {

    @Inject
    FruitSyncService service;

    @GET
    public List<Fruit> getAll() {
        return service.findAll();
    }

    @GET
    @Path("{name}")
    public Fruit getSingle(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return service.get(name);
    }

    @POST
    public List<Fruit> add(Fruit fruit) {
        service.add(fruit);
        return getAll();
    }
}
----

> The implementation is pretty straightforward and you just need to define your endpoints using the JAX-RS annotations and use the `FruitSyncService` or `FruitAsyncService` to list/add new fruits.

Reviewer: The async service is not yet created?

Reviewer: I would remove the "or `FruitAsyncService`" here as it comes later.

Author: Yep, indeed, removed - leftover because of my initial structure of the guide.

== Configuring DynamoDB clients

> Both DynamoDB clients (syn & async) are configurable via the `application.properties` file that can be provided in the `src/main/resources` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both DynamoDB clients (sync and async) are configurable via the `application.properties` file that can be provided in the `src/main/resources` directory.
```

> If you're going to use local DynamoDB instance configure set it with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're going to use a local DynamoDB instance, configure it as follows:
```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.dynamodb.region=eu-central-1
quarkus.dynamodb.endpoint-override=http://localhost:8000

quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=STATIC
quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.static-provider.access-key-id=test-key
quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.static-provider.secret-access-key=test-secret
----

> - `quarkus.dynamodb.region` - It's required by the client, but since you're using local DynamoDB instance you can pick any valid AWS region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `quarkus.dynamodb.region` - It's required by the client, but since you're using a local DynamoDB instance you can pick any valid AWS region.
```

> - `quarkus.dynamodb.endpoint-override` - Override the DynamoDB client to use a local instance instead of AWS service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `quarkus.dynamodb.endpoint-override` - Override the DynamoDB client to use a local instance instead of an AWS service
```

> - `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type` - Set `STATIC` credentials provider with any values for `access-key-id` & `secret-access-key`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type` - Set `STATIC` credentials provider with any values for `access-key-id` and `secret-access-key`
```

> If you want to work with AWS account, you'd need to set it with:\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to work with an AWS account, you'd need to set it with:
```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.dynamodb.region=<YOUR_REGION>
quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=DEFAULT
----

> - `quarkus.dynamodb.region` you should set it to the region where you provisioned DynamoDB table,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `quarkus.dynamodb.region` you should set it to the region where you provisioned the DynamoDB table,
```

> - `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type` - use `DEFAULT` credentials provider chain that looks for credentials in this order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type` - use the `DEFAULT` credentials provider chain that looks for credentials in this order:
```

- Java System Properties - `aws.accessKeyId` and `aws.secretKey`
* Environment Variables - `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`
* Credential profiles file at the default location (`~/.aws/credentials`) shared by all AWS SDKs and the AWS CLI

> * Credentials delivered through the Amazon EC2 container service if `AWS_CONTAINER_CREDENTIALS_RELATIVE_URI` environment variable is set and security manager has permission to access the variable,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Credentials delivered through the Amazon EC2 container service if the `AWS_CONTAINER_CREDENTIALS_RELATIVE_URI` environment variable is set and the security manager has permission to access the variable,
```

* Instance profile credentials delivered through the Amazon EC2 metadata service

== Next steps

=== Packaging

Packaging your application is as simple as `./mvnw clean package`.
It can be run with `java -jar target/dynamodb-client-1.0-SNAPSHOT-runner.jar`.

With GraalVM installed, you can also create a native executable binary: `./mvnw clean package -Dnative`.
Depending on your system, that will take some time.

=== Going asynchronous

> Thanks to the AWS SDK v2.x used by the Quarkus extension, you can use asynchronous programming model out of the box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the AWS SDK v2.x used by the Quarkus extension, you can use the asynchronous programming model out of the box.
```

> Create a `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitAsyncService` that will do the same but using an asynchronous programming model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `org.acme.dynamodb.FruitAsyncService` that will be similar to our `FruitSyncService` but using an asynchronous programming model.
```

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.dynamodb;

import java.util.List;
import java.util.concurrent.CompletableFuture;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import javax.inject.Inject;

import software.amazon.awssdk.services.dynamodb.DynamoDbAsyncClient;

@ApplicationScoped
public class FruitAsyncService extends AbstractService {

    @Inject
    DynamoDbAsyncClient dynamoDB;

    public CompletableFuture<List<Fruit>> findAll() {
        return dynamoDB.scan(scanRequest())
                .thenApply(res -> res.items().stream().map(Fruit::from).collect(Collectors.toList()));
    }

    public CompletableFuture<List<Fruit>> add(Fruit fruit) {
        return dynamoDB.putItem(putRequest(fruit)).thenCompose(ret -> findAll());
    }

    public CompletableFuture<Fruit> get(String name) {
        return dynamoDB.getItem(getRequest(name)).thenApply(resp -> Fruit.from(resp.item()));
    }
}
----

> And asynchronous fruit resource class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And an asynchronous REST resource:
```

- Credential profiles file at the default location (~/.aws/credentials) shared by all AWS SDKs and the AWS CLI
- Credentials delivered through the Amazon EC2 container service if `AWS_CONTAINER_CREDENTIALS_RELATIVE_URI` environment variable is set and security manager has permission to access the variable.
- Instance profile credentials delivered through the Amazon EC2 metadata service

Additionally, you can configure the provider with:
|===
|Configuration key|Java type|Default Value|Description

|quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.default-provider.async-credential-update-enabled
|Boolean
|`false`
|Configure whether this provider should fetch credentials asynchronously in the background. If this is `true`, threads are less likely to block, but additional resources are used to maintain the provider.

|quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.default-provider.reuse-last-provider-enabled
|Boolean
|`true`
|Controls whether the provider should reuse the last successful credentials provider in the chain. Reusing the last successful credentials provider will typically return credentials faster than searching through the chain.
|===

=== STATIC credentials provider

> If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=STATIC` is specified, the provider uses the access key & secret access key specified with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=STATIC` is specified, the provider uses the access key and secret access key specified with:
```

=== ENV_VARIABLE credentials provider
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=ENV_VARIABLE` is specified, it loads credentials from the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` and `AWS_SESSION_TOKEN` environment variables.

=== PROFILE credentials provider
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=PROFILE` is specified, credentials are based on AWS configuration profiles.
This loads credentials from a http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html[profile file], allowing you to share multiple sets of AWS security credentials between different tools like the AWS SDK for Java and the AWS CLI.

It can be configured with:
|===
|Configuration key|Java type|Default Value|Description

|quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.profile-provider.profile-name
|String
|`default`
|Define the name of the profile that should be used by this credentials provider. If not specified, the value in `AWS_PROFILE` environment variable or `aws.profile` system property is used.
|===

=== CONTAINER credentials provider
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=CONTAINER` is specified, it loads credentials from a local metadata service.

> Containers currently supported by AWS SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Containers currently supported by the AWS SDK:
```

- Amazon Elastic Container Service (ECS)
- AWS Greengrass

=== INSTANCE_PROFILE credentials provider
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=INSTANCE_PROFILE` is specified, it loads credentials from the Amazon EC2 Instance Metadata Service.

=== PROCESS credentials provider

> If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=PROCESS` used, credentials to be loaded from an external process. This is used to support the credential_process setting in the profile credentials file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `quarkus.dynamodb.credentials.type=PROCESS` used, credentials are loaded from an external process. This is used to support the credential_process setting in the profile credentials file.
```

See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/topic/config-vars.html#sourcing-credentials-from-external-processes[Sourcing Credentials From External Processes] for more information.

> It can be configured with:

Reviewer: I haven't read everything here. We are working on auto-generating this part from the Javadoc. I don't know how it will fly with this extension as the config is a bit complicated. We'll see.

Author: That's good news. So maybe i'll move some of descriptions to the config beans (as here are a little bit more explanations) and remove it from guide. what do you think ?

Reviewer: Let's keep it that way for now, we are still making progress on this and I think we will need to test and adjust for this particular doc.

Author: ok
